 i have read the statement of mahatma gandhi on the recent presidential election with all the attention that it deserves. it grieves me to find that mahatma gandhi has taken it as a personal defeat. i would respectfully differ from him on this point. the voters, that is the delegates, were not called upon to vote for or against mahatma gandhi. consequently the result of the contest does not in my view and in the view of most people affect him personally.
 congress does not foolishly accept the two nation theory, there will be only one congress in the whole country. the partition of india does not and should not mean the partition of the congress. the partition of india into two sovereign states does not mean that india is two nations. sup posing one or more princely states kept out of the union, would the congress turn their representatives out of the congress ? would the states people not expect it to take even greater interest in their welfare ? of course the problems that this will create will be even more complicated and some of them will be more difficult of solution, but there still will be no reason for the congress to be broken up into two. it will require greater political acumen, greater depth of thought and much more patient deliberation and decision. we must not anticipate incapacitating difficulties.
 then why does not congress give a clear lead? because it feels helpless. it is not in favour of division. but it says, and with perfect logic, that if pakistan is to be conceded, justice should be done to non muslim majority areas of bengal and the punjab, and to the sikhs, and these provinces should be partitioned on the same principle on which the muslim league demands the partition of india. i do not agree with that view. in my opinion, the congress should in no circumstance be party to partition. we should tell the british to quit unconditionally. if they do not listen and partition the country in spite of us, we shall know what to do. why should we make ourselves accessory to what we hold to be evil?
 insoluble. the one is the royal way of non violence, and the other of violence. in the first way the formal consent or co operation of the other party is unnecessary. if there is a dispute between two boys over the ownership of an apple, the non violent way is to leave the apple for the other party to take, the latter well knowing that it would mean non co operation on the surrendering partys part. the second way is the usual way of violence. there the parties fight with each other till one is for the time being worsted. all interested in freedom have to make the choice. i suppose the choice has already been made by the chief actors. but the rank and file do not know their own minds. it is necessary for them, if they can, to think independently and take to non violent action in terms of unity. it consists in hindus and muslims on the wayside fraternizing with one another, if they believe that joint life is a perfect possibility, nay, a necessity. whether those who believe in the two nation theory and communal partition of india can live as friends co operating with one another i do not know. if the vast majority of muslims regard themselves as a separate nation having nothing in common with hindus and others, no power on earth can compel them to think otherwise. and if they want to partition india on that basis, they must have the partition, unless hindus want to fight against such a division. so far as i can see such a preparation is silently going on behalf of both the parties. that way lies suicide. each party will probably want british or foreign aid. in that case, good bye to independence. the fight will then range round not independence but the imaginary apple after the manner of the imaginary boys. i dare not contemplate the actuality. i should not like to be its living witness. i would love to see a joint fight for independence. in the very process of securing independence it is highly likely that we shall have forgotten our quarrels. but if we have not, it will be then only time to quarrel, if we must.
 insolent officers. i want you to understand what i mean by outrage of their modesty. their veils were opened with his stick by an officer. men who were declared to be utterly innocent by the hunter committee were made to crawl on their bellies. and all these wrongs totally undeserved remain unavenged. if it was the duty of the government of india to punish those who were guilty of incendiarism and murder, as i hold it was their duty, it was doubly their duty to punish officers who insulted and oppressed innocent people. but in the face of these official wrongs we have the debate in the house of lords supporting official terrorism. it is this double wrong, the affront to islam and the injury to the manhood of the punjab, that we feel bound to wipe out by non co operation. we have prayed, petitioned, agitated, we have passed resolutions. mr. mahomed ali supported by his friends is now waiting on the british public. he has pleaded the cause of islam in a most manful manner, but his pleading has fallen on deaf ears and we have his word for it that whilst france and italy have shown great sympathy for the cause of islam, it is the british ministers who have shown no sympathy. this shows which way the british ministers and the present holders of office in india mean to deal by the people. there is no goodwill, there is no desire to placate the people of india. the people of india must therefore have a remedy to redress the double wrong. the method of the west is violence. wherever the people of the west have felt a wrong either justly or unjustly, they have rebelled and shed blood. as i have said in my letter to the viceroy of india, half of india does not believe in the remedy of violence. the other half is too weak to offer it. but the whole of india is deeply hurt and stirred by this wrong, and it is for that reason that i have suggested to the people of india the remedy of non co operation, i consider it perfectly harmless, absolutely constitutional and yet perfectly efficacious. it is a remedy in which, if it is properly adopted, victory is certain, and it is the age old remedy of self sacrifice. are the mussulmans of india who feel the great wrong done to islam ready to make an adequate self sacrifice? all the scriptures of the world teach us that there can be no compromise between justice and injustice. co operation on the part of a justice loving man with an unjust man is a crime. and if we desire to compel this great government to the will of the people, as we must, we must adopt this great remedy of non co operation. and if the mussulmans of india offer non co operation to government in order to secure justice in the khilafat matter, i believe it is the duty of the hindus to
 why do you write in english? from your name you appear to be a gujarati. it is possible that you belong to north india. anyway you could have written to me in urdu, gujarati, hindi or bengali. but let this be. now i wish to come to your letter. i feel that if the government has relations with any other chamber of commerce there is no reason why they should have none with yours. but in my opinion after independence and the partition of india there should not be any communal associations of trade, etc. i have said something in this respect during my speech the day before yesterday. 3 i hope you will
 resolution. he emphasized that what he wanted was not the recognition of indian independence on paper, but in action. asked if his movement would not hamper war efforts of the united nations, mahatma gandhi said: the movement is intended not only to help china but also to make common cause with the allies. on his attention being drawn to mr. amerys latest statement in the house of commons, mahatma gandhi said: i am very much afraid that we shall have the misfortune to listen to a repetition of that language in stronger terms, but that cannot possibly delay the pace of the people or the group that is determined to go its way. mahatma gandhi added: there is no question of one more chance. after all, it is an open rebellion. asked what form his movement would take, mahatma gandhi said: the conception is that of a mass movement on the widest possible scale. it will include what is possible to include in a mass movement or what people are capable of doing. this will be a mass movement of a purely non violent character. asked if he would court imprisonment this time, mahatma gandhi said: it is too soft a thing. there is no such thing as courting imprisonment this time. my intention is to make it as short and swift as possible.a.p.i. 37. this message is an eye opener for me. i have often suffered from misreporting or coloured epitomes of my writings and speeches even to the point of being lynched 1. this one, though not quite as bad, is bad enough. the above a.p. summary gives, if it does, the clue to the authors source for the misquotation and the additional sentences. if he used that source, the question arises why he went out of his way to use that doubtful and unauthorized source, when he had before him the authentic text of the full interview in harijan of 19th july last. he has made a most liberal, though disjointed and biased use of the columns of harijan for building up his case against me. at page 13 of the indictment he thus begins the charge culminating in the misquotation at page 14. from this point onwards mr. gandhis conception of the struggle developed rapidly. his writings on the subject are too lengthy to quote in full, but the following excerpts from harijan illustrate the direction in which his mind was moving. on the same page he has quoted passages from page 233 of harijan from the report of the interview in question. i am, therefore,
